THE MACHINE STOPS
Part I

THE AIR-SHIP

Imagine, if you can, a small room, hexagonal in shape, like the cell of a bee. It is lighted neither by window nor by lamp, yet it is filledwith a soft radiance. There are no apertures for ventilation, yet theair is fresh. There are no musical instruments, and yet, at the momentthat my meditation opens, this room is throbbing with melodious sounds.An arm-chair is in the centre, by its side a reading-desk--that isall the furniture. And in the arm-chair there sits a swaddled lump offlesh--a woman, about five feet high, with a face as white as a fungus.It is to her that the little room belongs.

An electric bell rang.

The woman touched a switch and the music was silent.

"I suppose I must see who it is," she thought, and set her chair inmotion. The chair, like the music, was worked by machinery, and itrolled her to the other side of the room, where the bell still rangimportunately.

"Who is it?" she called. Her voice was irritable, for she had beeninterrupted often since the music began. She knew several thousandpeople; in certain directions human intercourse had advanced enormously.

But when she listened into the receiver, her white face wrinkled intosmiles, and she said:

"Very well. Let us talk, I will isolate myself. I do not expectanything important will happen for the next five minutes--for I cangive you fully five minutes, Kuno. Then I must deliver my lecture on'Music during the Australian Period.'"

She touched the isolation knob, so that no one else could speak toher. Then she touched the lighting apparatus, and the little room wasplunged into darkness.

"Be quick!" she called, her irritation returning. "Be quick, Kuno; hereI am in the dark wasting my time."

But it was fully fifteen seconds before the round plate that sheheld in her hands began to glow. A faint blue light shot across it,darkening to purple, and presently she could see the image of her son,who lived on the other side of the earth, and he could see her.

"Kuno, how slow you are."

He smiled gravely.

"I really believe you enjoy dawdling."

"I have called you before, mother, but you were always busy orisolated. I have something particular to say."

"What is it, dearest boy? Be quick. Why could you not send it bypneumatic post?"

"Because I prefer saying such a thing. I want----"

"Well?"

"I want you to come and see me."

Vashti watched his face in the blue plate.

"But I can see you!" she exclaimed. "What more do you want?"

"I want to see you not through the Machine," said Kuno. "I want tospeak to you not through the wearisome Machine."

"Oh, hush!" said his mother, vaguely shocked. "You mustn't say anythingagainst the Machine."

"Why not?"

"One mustn't."

"You talk as if a god had made the Machine," cried the other. "Ibelieve that you pray to it when you are unhappy. Men made it, do notforget that. Great men, but men. The Machine is much, but it is noteverything. I see something like you in this plate, but I do not seeyou. I hear something like you through this telephone, but I do nothear you. That is why I want you to come. Come and stop with me. Payme a visit, so that we can meet face to face, and talk about the hopesthat are in my mind."

She replied that she could scarcely spare the time for a visit.

"The air-ship barely takes two days to fly between me and you."

"I dislike air-ships."

"Why?"

"I dislike seeing the horrible brown earth, and the sea, and the starswhen it is dark. I get no ideas in an air-ship."

"I do not get them anywhere else."

"What kind of ideas can the air give you?"

He paused for an instant.

"Do you not know four big stars that form an oblong, and three starsclose together in the middle of the oblong, and hanging from thesestars, three other stars?"

"No, I do not. I dislike the stars. But did they give you an idea? Howinteresting; tell me."

"I had an idea that they were like a man."

"I do not understand."

"The four big stars are the man's shoulders and his knees. The threestars in the middle are like the belts that men wore once, and thethree stars hanging are like a sword."

"A sword?"

"Men carried swords about with them, to kill animals and other men."

"It does not strike me as a very good idea, but it is certainlyoriginal. When did it come to you first?"

"In the air-ship----" He broke off, and she fancied that he lookedsad. She could not be sure, for the Machine did not transmit nuancesof expression. It only gave a general idea of people--an idea thatwas good enough for all practical purposes, Vashti thought. Theimponderable bloom, declared by a discredited philosophy to be theactual essence of intercourse, was rightly ignored by the Machine, justas the imponderable bloom of the grape was ignored by the manufacturersof artificial fruit. Something "good enough" had long since beenaccepted by our race.

"The truth is," he continued, "that I want to see these stars again.They are curious stars. I want to see them not from the air-ship, butfrom the surface of the earth, as our ancestors did, thousands ofyears ago. I want to visit the surface of the earth."

She was shocked again.

"Mother, you must come, if only to explain to me what is the harm ofvisiting the surface of the earth."

"No harm," she replied, controlling herself. "But no advantage. Thesurface of the earth is only dust and mud, no life remains on it, andyou would need a respirator, or the cold of the outer air would killyou. One dies immediately in the outer air."

"I know; of course I shall take all precautions."

"And besides----"

"Well?"

She considered, and chose her words with care. Her son had a queertemper, and she wished to dissuade him from the expedition.

"It is contrary to the spirit of the age," she asserted.

"Do you mean by that, contrary to the Machine?"

"In a sense, but----"

His image in the blue plate faded.

"Kuno!"

He had isolated himself.

For a moment Vashti felt lonely.

Then she generated the light, and the sight of her room, flooded withradiance and studded with electric buttons, revived her. There werebuttons and switches everywhere--buttons to call for food, for music,for clothing. There was the hot-bath button, by pressure of which abasin of (imitation) marble rose out of the floor, filled to the brimwith a warm deodorised liquid. There was the cold-bath button. Therewas the button that produced literature. And there were of course thebuttons by which she communicated with her friends. The room, thoughit contained nothing, was in touch with all that she cared for in theworld.

Vashti's next move was to turn off the isolation-switch, and all theaccumulations of the last three minutes burst upon her. The room wasfilled with the noise of bells, and speaking-tubes. What was the newfood like? Could she recommend it? Had she had any ideas lately? Mightone tell her one's own ideas? Would she make an engagement to visit thepublic nurseries at an early date?--say this day month.

To most of these questions she replied with irritation--a growingquality in that accelerated age. She said that the new food washorrible. That she could not visit the public nurseries through pressof engagements. That she had no ideas of her own but had just beentold one--that four stars and three in the middle were like a man: shedoubted there was much in it. Then she switched off her correspondents,for it was time to deliver her lecture on Australian music.

The clumsy system of public gatherings had been long since abandoned;neither Vashti nor her audience stirred from their rooms. Seated inher arm-chair she spoke, while they in their arm-chairs heard her,fairly well, and saw her, fairly well. She opened with a humorousaccount of music in the pre-Mongolian epoch, and went on to describethe great outburst of song that followed the Chinese conquest. Remoteand primæval as were the methods of I-San-So and the Brisbane school,she yet felt (she said) that study of them might repay the musician oftoday: they had freshness; they had, above all, ideas.

Her lecture, which lasted ten minutes, was well received, and at itsconclusion she and many of her audience listened to a lecture on thesea; there were ideas to be got from the sea; the speaker had donned arespirator and visited it lately. Then she fed, talked to many friends,had a bath, talked again, and summoned her bed.

The bed was not to her liking. It was too large, and she had a feelingfor a small bed. Complaint was useless, for beds were of the samedimension all over the world, and to have had an alternative sizewould have involved vast alterations in the Machine. Vashti isolatedherself--it was necessary, for neither day nor night existed under theground--and reviewed all that had happened since she had summoned thebed last. Ideas? Scarcely any. Events--was Kuno's invitation an event?

By her side, on the little reading-desk, was a survival from the agesof litter--one book. This was the Book of the Machine. In it wereinstructions against every possible contingency. If she was hot orcold or dyspeptic or at loss for a word, she went to the book, and ittold her which button to press. The Central Committee published it. Inaccordance with a growing habit, it was richly bound.

Sitting up in the bed, she took it reverently in her hands. She glancedround the glowing room as if some one might be watching her. Then, halfashamed, half joyful, she murmured "O Machine! O Machine!" and raisedthe volume to her lips. Thrice she kissed it, thrice inclined her head,thrice she felt the delirium of acquiescence. Her ritual performed,she turned to page 1367, which gave the times of the departure of theair-ships from the island in the southern hemisphere, under whose soilshe lived, to the island in the northern hemisphere, whereunder livedher son.

She thought, "I have not the time."

She made the room dark and slept; she awoke and made the room light;she ate and exchanged ideas with her friends, and listened to musicand attended lectures; she made the room dark and slept. Above her,beneath her, and around her, the Machine hummed eternally; she did notnotice the noise, for she had been born with it in her ears. The earth,carrying her, hummed as it sped through silence, turning her now to theinvisible sun, now to the invisible stars. She awoke and made the roomlight.

"Kuno!"

"I will not talk to you," he answered, "until you come."

"Have you been on the surface of the earth since we spoke last?"

His image faded.

Again she consulted the book. She became very nervous and lay backin her chair palpitating. Think of her as without teeth or hair.Presently she directed the chair to the wall, and pressed an unfamiliarbutton. The wall swung apart slowly. Through the opening she saw atunnel that curved slightly, so that its goal was not visible. Shouldshe go to see her son, here was the beginning of the journey.

Of course she knew all about the communication-system. There wasnothing mysterious in it. She would summon a car and it would fly withher down the tunnel until it reached the lift that communicated withthe air-ship station: the system had been in use for many, many years,long before the universal establishment of the Machine. And of courseshe had studied the civilisation that had immediately preceded herown--the civilisation that had mistaken the functions of the system,and had used it for bringing people to things, instead of for bringingthings to people. Those funny old days, when men went for change of airinstead of changing the air in their rooms! And yet--she was frightenedof the tunnel: she had not seen it since her last child was born. Itcurved--but not quite as she remembered; it was brilliant--but notquite as brilliant as a lecturer had suggested. Vashti was seized withthe terrors of direct experience. She shrank back into the room, andthe wall closed up again.

"Kuno," she said, "I cannot come to see you. I am not well."

Immediately an enormous apparatus fell on to her out of the ceiling, athermometer was automatically inserted between her lips, a stethoscopewas automatically laid upon her heart. She lay powerless. Cool padssoothed her forehead. Kuno had telegraphed to her doctor.

So the human passions still blundered up and down in the Machine.Vashti drank the medicine that the doctor projected into her mouth, andthe machinery retired into the ceiling. The voice of Kuno was heardasking how she felt.

"Better." Then with irritation: "But why do you not come to meinstead?"

"Because I cannot leave this place."

"Why?"

"Because, any moment, something tremendous may happen."

"Have you been on the surface of the earth yet?"

"Not yet."

"Then what is it?"

"I will not tell you through the Machine."

She resumed her life.

But she thought of Kuno as a baby, his birth, his removal to the publicnurseries, her one visit to him there, his visits to her--visits whichstopped when the Machine had assigned him a room on the other side ofthe earth. "Parents, duties of," said the book of the Machine, "ceaseat the moment of birth. P. 422327483." True, but there was somethingspecial about Kuno--indeed there had been something special aboutall her children--and, after all, she must brave the journey if hedesired it. And "something tremendous might happen." What did thatmean? The nonsense of a youthful man, no doubt, but she must go. Againshe pressed the unfamiliar button, again the wall swung back, and shesaw the tunnel that curved out of sight. Clasping the Book, she rose,tottered on to the platform, and summoned the car. Her room closedbehind her: the journey to the northern hemisphere had begun.

Of course it was perfectly easy. The car approached and in it shefound arm-chairs exactly like her own. When she signalled, it stopped,and she tottered into the lift. One other passenger was in the lift,the first fellow creature she had seen face to face for months. Fewtravelled in these days, for, thanks to the advance of science, theearth was exactly alike all over. Rapid intercourse, from which theprevious civilisation had hoped so much, had ended by defeating itself.What was the good of going to Pekin when it was just like Shrewsbury?Why return to Shrewsbury when it would be just like Pekin? Men seldommoved their bodies; all unrest was concentrated in the soul.

The air-ship service was a relic from the former age. It was kept up,because it was easier to keep it up than to stop it or to diminishit, but it now far exceeded the wants of the population. Vessel aftervessel would rise from the vomitories of Rye or of Christchurch (I usethe antique names), would sail into the crowded sky, and would draw upat the wharves of the south--empty. So nicely adjusted was the system,so independent of meteorology, that the sky, whether calm or cloudy,resembled a vast kaleidoscope whereon the same patterns periodicallyrecurred. The ship on which Vashti sailed started now at sunset, nowat dawn. But always, as it passed above Rheims, it would neighbour theship that served between Helsingfors and the Brazils, and, every thirdtime it surmounted the Alps, the fleet of Palermo would cross its trackbehind. Night and day, wind and storm, tide and earthquake, impeded manno longer. He had harnessed Leviathan. All the old literature, with itspraise of Nature, and its fear of Nature, rang false as the prattle ofa child.

Yet as Vashti saw the vast flank of the ship, stained with exposureto the outer air, her horror of direct experience returned. It wasnot quite like the air-ship in the cinematophote. For one thing itsmelt--not strongly or unpleasantly, but it did smell, and with hereyes shut she should have known that a new thing was close to her. Thenshe had to walk to it from the lift, had to submit to glances from theother passengers. The man in front dropped his Book--no great matter,but it disquieted them all. In the rooms, if the Book was dropped, thefloor raised it mechanically, but the gangway to the air-ship was notso prepared, and the sacred volume lay motionless. They stopped--thething was unforeseen--and the man, instead of picking up his property,felt the muscles of his arm to see how they had failed him. Then someone actually said with direct utterance: "We shall be late"--and theytrooped on board, Vashti treading on the pages as she did so.

Inside, her anxiety increased. The arrangements were old-fashioned andrough. There was even a female attendant, to whom she would have toannounce her wants during the voyage. Of course a revolving platformran the length of the boat, but she was expected to walk from it to hercabin. Some cabins were better than others, and she did not get thebest. She thought the attendant had been unfair, and spasms of rageshook her. The glass valves had closed, she could not go back. She saw,at the end of the vestibule, the lift in which she had ascended goingquietly up and down, empty. Beneath those corridors of shining tileswere rooms, tier below tier, reaching far into the earth, and in eachroom there sat a human being, eating, or sleeping, or producing ideas.And buried deep in the hive was her own room. Vashti was afraid.

"O Machine! O Machine!" she murmured, and caressed her Book, and wascomforted.

Then the sides of the vestibule seemed to melt together, as do thepassages that we see in dreams, the lift vanished, the Book that hadbeen dropped slid to the left and vanished, polished tiles rushedby like a stream of water, there was a slight jar, and the air-ship,issuing from its tunnel, soared above the waters of a tropical ocean.

It was night. For a moment she saw the coast of Sumatra edged by thephosphorescence of waves, and crowned by lighthouses, still sendingforth their disregarded beams. These also vanished, and only thestars distracted her. They were not motionless, but swayed to and froabove her head, thronging out of one skylight into another, as if theuniverse and not the air-ship was careening. And, as often happens onclear nights, they seemed now to be in perspective, now on a plane;now piled tier beyond tier into the infinite heavens, now concealinginfinity, a roof limiting for ever the visions of men. In either casethey seemed intolerable. "Are we to travel in the dark?" called thepassengers angrily, and the attendant, who had been careless, generatedthe light, and pulled down the blinds of pliable metal. When theair-ships had been built, the desire to look direct at things stilllingered in the world. Hence the extraordinary number of skylights andwindows, and the proportionate discomfort to those who were civilisedand refined. Even in Vashti's cabin one star peeped through a flaw inthe blind, and after a few hours' uneasy slumber, she was disturbed byan unfamiliar glow, which was the dawn.

Quick as the ship had sped westwards, the earth had rolled eastwardsquicker still, and had dragged back Vashti and her companions towardsthe sun. Science could prolong the night, but only for a little,and those high hopes of neutralising the earth's diurnal revolutionhad passed, together with hopes that were possibly higher. To "keeppace with the sun," or even to outstrip it, had been the aim of thecivilisation preceding this. Racing aeroplanes had been built forthe purpose, capable of enormous speed, and steered by the greatestintellects of the epoch. Round the globe they went, round and round,westward, westward, round and round, amidst humanity's applause. Invain. The globe went eastward quicker still, horrible accidentsoccurred, and the Committee of the Machine, at the time rising intoprominence, declared the pursuit illegal, unmechanical, and punishableby Homelessness.

Of Homelessness more will be said later.

Doubtless the Committee was right. Yet the attempt to "defeat the sun"aroused the last common interest that our race experienced about theheavenly bodies, or indeed about anything. It was the last time thatmen were compacted by thinking of a power outside the world. The sunhad conquered, yet it was the end of his spiritual dominion. Dawn,midday, twilight, the zodiacal path, touched neither men's lives northeir hearts, and science retreated into the ground, to concentrateherself upon problems that she was certain of solving.

So when Vashti found her cabin invaded by a rosy finger of light,she was annoyed, and tried to adjust the blind. But the blind flewup altogether, and she saw through the skylight small pink clouds,swaying against a background of blue, and as the sun crept higher, itsradiance entered direct, brimming down the wall, like a golden sea. Itrose and fell with the air-ship's motion, just as waves rise and fall,but it advanced steadily, as a tide advances. Unless she was careful,it would strike her face. A spasm of horror shook her and she rangfor the attendant. The attendant too was horrified, but she could donothing; it was not her place to mend the blind. She could only suggestthat the lady should change her cabin, which she accordingly preparedto do.

People were almost exactly alike all over the world, but the attendantof the air-ship, perhaps owing to her exceptional duties, had growna little out of the common. She had often to address passengerswith direct speech, and this had given her a certain roughness andoriginality of manner. When Vashti swerved away from the sunbeams witha cry, she behaved barbarically--she put out her hand to steady her.

"How dare you!" exclaimed the passenger. "You forget yourself!"

The woman was confused, and apologised for not having let her fall.People never touched one another. The custom had become obsolete, owingto the Machine.

"Where are we now?" asked Vashti haughtily.

"We are over Asia," said the attendant, anxious to be polite.

"Asia?"

"You must excuse my common way of speaking. I have got into the habitof calling places over which I pass by their unmechanical names."

"Oh, I remember Asia. The Mongols came from it."

"Beneath us, in the open air, stood a city that was once called Simla."

"Have you ever heard of the Mongols and of the Brisbane school?"

"No."

"Brisbane also stood in the open air."

"Those mountains to the right--let me show you them." She pushed backa metal blind. The main chain of the Himalayas was revealed. "They wereonce called the Roof of the World, those mountains."

"What a foolish name!"

"You must remember that, before the dawn of civilisation, they seemedto be an impenetrable wall that touched the stars. It was supposedthat no one but the gods could exist above their summits. How we haveadvanced, thanks to the Machine!"

"How we have advanced, thanks to the Machine!" said Vashti.

"How we have advanced, thanks to the Machine!" echoed the passengerwho had dropped his Book the night before, and who was standing in thepassage.

"And that white stuff in the cracks?--what is it?"

"I have forgotten its name."

"Cover the window, please. These mountains give me no ideas."

The northern aspect of the Himalayas was in deep shadow: on the Indianslope the sun had just prevailed. The forests had been destroyedduring the literature epoch for the purpose of making newspaper-pulp,but the snows were awakening to their morning glory, and clouds stillhung on the breasts of Kinchinjunga. In the plain were seen the ruinsof cities, with diminished rivers creeping by their walls, and by thesides of these were sometimes the signs of vomitories, marking thecities of today. Over the whole prospect air-ships rushed, crossing andintercrossing with incredible aplomb, and rising nonchalantly whenthey desired to escape the perturbations of the lower atmosphere and totraverse the Roof of the World.

"We have indeed advanced, thanks to the Machine," repeated theattendant, and hid the Himalayas behind a metal blind.

The day dragged wearily forward. The passengers sat each in his cabin,avoiding one another with an almost physical repulsion and longing tobe once more under the surface of the earth. There were eight or ten ofthem, mostly young males, sent out from the public nurseries to inhabitthe rooms of those who had died in various parts of the earth. The manwho had dropped his Book was on the homeward journey. He had been sentto Sumatra for the purpose of propagating the race. Vashti alone wastravelling by her private will.

At midday she took a second glance at the earth. The air-ship wascrossing another range of mountains, but she could see little, owing toclouds. Masses of black rock hovered below her, and merged indistinctlyinto grey. Their shapes were fantastic; one of them resembled aprostrate man.

"No ideas here," murmured Vashti, and hid the Caucasus behind a metalblind.

In the evening she looked again. They were crossing a golden sea, inwhich lay many small islands and one peninsula.

She repeated, "No ideas here," and hid Greece behind a metal blind.


Part II

THE MENDING APPARATUS

By a vestibule, by a lift, by a tubular railway, by a platform, by asliding door--by reversing all the steps of her departure did Vashtiarrive at her son's room, which exactly resembled her own. She mightwell declare that the visit was superfluous. The buttons, the knobs,the reading-desk with the Book, the temperature, the atmosphere, theillumination--all were exactly the same. And if Kuno himself, flesh ofher flesh, stood close beside her at last, what profit was there inthat? She was too well-bred to shake him by the hand.

Averting her eyes, she spoke as follows:

"Here I am. I have had the most terrible journey and greatly retardedthe development of my soul. It is not worth it, Kuno, it is not worthit. My time is too precious. The sunlight almost touched me, and I havemet with the rudest people. I can only stop a few minutes. Say whatyou want to say, and then I must return."

"I have been threatened with Homelessness," said Kuno.

She looked at him now.

"I have been threatened with Homelessness, and I could not tell yousuch a thing through the Machine."

Homelessness means death. The victim is exposed to the air, which killshim.

"I have been outside since I spoke to you last. The tremendous thinghas happened, and they have discovered me."

"But why shouldn't you go outside!" she exclaimed. "It is perfectlylegal, perfectly mechanical, to visit the surface of the earth. I havelately been to a lecture on the sea; there is no objection to that; onesimply summons a respirator and gets an Egression-permit. It is not thekind of thing that spiritually-minded people do, and I begged you notto do it, but there is no legal objection to it."

"I did not get an Egression-permit."

"Then how did you get out?"

"I found out a way of my own."

The phrase conveyed no meaning to her, and he had to repeat it.

"A way of your own?" she whispered. "But that would be wrong."

"Why?"

The question shocked her beyond measure.

"You are beginning to worship the Machine," he said coldly. "You thinkit irreligious of me to have found out a way of my own. It was justwhat the Committee thought, when they threatened me with Homelessness."

At this she grew angry. "I worship nothing!" she cried. "I am mostadvanced. I don't think you irreligious, for there is no such thing asreligion left. All the fear and the superstition that existed once havebeen destroyed by the Machine. I only meant that to find out a way ofyour own was----Besides, there is no new way out."

"So it is always supposed."

"Except through the vomitories, for which one must have anEgression-permit, it is impossible to get out. The Book says so."

"Well, the Book's wrong, for I have been out on my feet."

For Kuno was possessed of a certain physical strength.

By these days it was a demerit to be muscular. Each infant wasexamined at birth, and all who promised undue strength were destroyed.Humanitarians may protest, but it would have been no true kindness tolet an athlete live; he would never have been happy in that state oflife to which the Machine had called him; he would have yearned fortrees to climb, rivers to bathe in, meadows and hills against which hemight measure his body. Man must be adapted to his surroundings, musthe not? In the dawn of the world our weakly must be exposed on MountTaygetus, in its twilight our strong will suffer euthanasia, that theMachine may progress, that the Machine may progress, that the Machinemay progress eternally.

"You know that we have lost the sense of space. We say 'space isannihilated,' but we have annihilated not space, but the sense thereof.We have lost a part of ourselves. I determined to recover it, and Ibegan by walking up and down the platform of the railway outside myroom. Up and down, until I was tired, and so did recapture the meaningof 'Near' and 'Far.' 'Near' is a place to which I can get quickly onmy feet, not a place to which the train or the air-ship will take mequickly. 'Far' is a place to which I cannot get quickly on my feet;the vomitory is 'far,' though I could be there in thirty-eight secondsby summoning the train. Man is the measure. That was my first lesson.Man's feet are the measure for distance, his hands are the measurefor ownership, his body is the measure for all that is lovable anddesirable and strong. Then I went further: it was then that I called toyou for the first time, and you would not come.

"This city, as you know, is built deep beneath the surface of theearth, with only the vomitories protruding. Having paced the platformoutside my own room, I took the lift to the next platform and pacedthat also, and so with each in turn, until I came to the topmost, abovewhich begins the earth. All the platforms were exactly alike, and allthat I gained by visiting them was to develop my sense of space andmy muscles. I think I should have been content with this--it is not alittle thing--but as I walked and brooded, it occurred to me that ourcities had been built in the days when men still breathed the outerair, and that there had been ventilation shafts for the workmen. Icould think of nothing but these ventilation shafts. Had they beendestroyed by all the food-tubes and medicine-tubes and music-tubesthat the Machine has evolved lately? Or did traces of them remain? Onething was certain. If I came upon them anywhere, it would be in therailway-tunnels of the topmost story. Everywhere else, all space wasaccounted for.

"I am telling my story quickly, but don't think that I was not a cowardor that your answers never depressed me. It is not the proper thing, itis not mechanical, it is not decent to walk along a railway-tunnel.I did not fear that I might tread upon a live rail and be killed. Ifeared something far more intangible--doing what was not contemplatedby the Machine. Then I said to myself, 'Man is the measure,' and Iwent, and after many visits I found an opening.

"The tunnels, of course, were lighted. Everything is light, artificiallight; darkness is the exception. So when I saw a black gap in thetiles, I knew that it was an exception, and rejoiced. I put in myarm--I could put in no more at first--and waved it round and roundin ecstasy. I loosened another tile, and put in my head, and shoutedinto the darkness: 'I am coming, I shall do it yet,' and my voicereverberated down endless passages. I seemed to hear the spirits ofthose dead workmen who had returned each evening to the starlight andto their wives, and all the generations who had lived in the open aircalled back to me, 'You will do it yet, you are coming.'"

He paused, and, absurd as he was, his last words moved her. For Kunohad lately asked to be a father, and his request had been refused bythe Committee. His was not a type that the Machine desired to hand on.

"Then a train passed. It brushed by me, but I thrust my head and armsinto the hole. I had done enough for one day, so I crawled back to theplatform, went down in the lift, and summoned my bed. Ah, what dreams!And again I called you, and again you refused."

She shook her head and said:

"Don't. Don't talk of these terrible things. You make me miserable. Youare throwing civilisation away."

"But I had got back the sense of space and a man cannot rest then.I determined to get in at the hole and climb the shaft. And so Iexercised my arms. Day after day I went through ridiculous movements,until my flesh ached, and I could hang by my hands and hold the pillowof my bed outstretched for many minutes. Then I summoned a respirator,and started.

"It was easy at first. The mortar had somehow rotted, and I soon pushedsome more tiles in, and clambered after them into the darkness, and thespirits of the dead comforted me. I don't know what I mean by that.I just say what I felt. I felt, for the first time, that a protesthad been lodged against corruption, and that even as the dead werecomforting me, so I was comforting the unborn. I felt that humanityexisted, and that it existed without clothes. How can I possiblyexplain this? It was naked, humanity seemed naked, and all these tubesand buttons and machineries neither came into the world with us, norwill they follow us out, nor do they matter supremely while we arehere. Had I been strong, I would have torn off every garment I had, andgone out into the outer air unswaddled. But this is not for me, norperhaps for my generation. I climbed with my respirator and my hygienicclothes and my dietetic tabloids! Better thus than not at all.

"There was a ladder, made of some primæval metal. The light from therailway fell upon its lowest rungs, and I saw that it led straightupwards out of the rubble at the bottom of the shaft. Perhaps ourancestors ran up and down it a dozen times daily, in their building. AsI climbed, the rough edges cut through my gloves so that my hands bled.The light helped me for a little, and then came darkness and, worsestill, silence which pierced my ears like a sword. The Machine hums!Did you know that? Its hum penetrates our blood, and may even guide ourthoughts. Who knows! I was getting beyond its power. Then I thought:'This silence means that I am doing wrong.' But I heard voices in thesilence, and again they strengthened me." He laughed. "I had need ofthem. The next moment I cracked my head against something."

She sighed.

"I had reached one of those pneumatic stoppers that defend us fromthe outer air. You may have noticed them on the air-ship. Pitch dark,my feet on the rungs of an invisible ladder, my hands cut; I cannotexplain how I lived through this part, but the voices still comfortedme, and I felt for fastenings. The stopper, I suppose, was about eightfeet across. I passed my hand over it as far as I could reach. It wasperfectly smooth. I felt it almost to the centre. Not quite to thecentre, for my arm was too short. Then the voice said: 'Jump. It isworth it. There may be a handle in the centre, and you may catch holdof it and so come to us your own way. And if there is no handle, sothat you may fall and are dashed to pieces--it is still worth it: youwill still come to us your own way.' So I jumped. There was a handle,and----"

He paused. Tears gathered in his mother's eyes. She knew that he wasfated. If he did not die today he would die tomorrow. There was notroom for such a person in the world. And with her pity disgust mingled.She was ashamed at having borne such a son, she who had always been sorespectable and so full of ideas. Was he really the little boy to whomshe had taught the use of his stops and buttons, and to whom she hadgiven his first lessons in the Book? The very hair that disfigured hislip showed that he was reverting to some savage type. On atavism theMachine can have no mercy.

"There was a handle, and I did catch it. I hung tranced over thedarkness and heard the hum of these workings as the last whisper ina dying dream. All the things I had cared about and all the peopleI had spoken to through tubes appeared infinitely little. Meanwhilethe handle revolved. My weight had set something in motion and I spanslowly, and then----

"I cannot describe it. I was lying with my face to the sunshine. Bloodpoured from my nose and ears and I heard a tremendous roaring. Thestopper, with me clinging to it, had simply been blown out of theearth, and the air that we make down here was escaping through the ventinto the air above. It burst up like a fountain. I crawled back toit--for the upper air hurts--and, as it were, I took great sips fromthe edge. My respirator had flown goodness knows where, my clotheswere torn. I just lay with my lips close to the hole, and I sippeduntil the bleeding stopped. You can imagine nothing so curious. Thishollow in the grass--I will speak of it in a minute,--the sun shininginto it, not brilliantly but through marbled clouds,--the peace, thenonchalance, the sense of space, and, brushing my cheek, the roaringfountain of our artificial air! Soon I spied my respirator, bobbingup and down in the current high above my head, and higher still weremany air-ships. But no one ever looks out of air-ships, and in my casethey could not have picked me up. There I was, stranded. The sun shonea little way down the shaft, and revealed the topmost rung of theladder, but it was hopeless trying to reach it. I should either havebeen tossed up again by the escape, or else have fallen in, and died. Icould only lie on the grass, sipping and sipping, and from time to timeglancing around me.

"I knew that I was in Wessex, for I had taken care to go to a lectureon the subject before starting. Wessex lies above the room in whichwe are talking now. It was once an important state. Its kings heldall the southern coast from the Andredswald to Cornwall, while theWansdyke protected them on the north, running over the high ground. Thelecturer was only concerned with the rise of Wessex, so I do not knowhow long it remained an international power, nor would the knowledgehave assisted me. To tell the truth I could do nothing but laugh,during this part. There was I, with a pneumatic stopper by my side anda respirator bobbing over my head, imprisoned, all three of us, in agrass-grown hollow that was edged with fern."

Then he grew grave again.

"Lucky for me that it was a hollow. For the air began to fall back intoit and to fill it as water fills a bowl. I could crawl about. PresentlyI stood. I breathed a mixture, in which the air that hurts predominatedwhenever I tried to climb the sides. This was not so bad. I had notlost my tabloids and remained ridiculously cheerful, and as for theMachine, I forgot about it altogether. My one aim now was to get tothe top, where the ferns were, and to view whatever objects lay beyond.

"I rushed the slope. The new air was still too bitter for me and I camerolling back, after a momentary vision of something grey. The sun grewvery feeble, and I remembered that he was in Scorpio--I had been to alecture on that too. If the sun is in Scorpio and you are in Wessex, itmeans that you must be as quick as you can, or it will get too dark.(This is the first bit of useful information I have ever got from alecture, and I expect it will be the last.) It made me try franticallyto breathe the new air, and to advance as far as I dared out of mypond. The hollow filled so slowly. At times I thought that the fountainplayed with less vigour. My respirator seemed to dance nearer theearth; the roar was decreasing."

He broke off.

"I don't think this is interesting you. The rest will interest you evenless. There are no ideas in it, and I wish that I had not troubled youto come. We are too different, mother."

She told him to continue.

"It was evening before I climbed the bank. The sun had very nearlyslipped out of the sky by this time, and I could not get a good view.You, who have just crossed the Roof of the World, will not want to hearan account of the little hills that I saw--low colourless hills. But tome they were living and the turf that covered them was a skin, underwhich their muscles rippled, and I felt that those hills had calledwith incalculable force to men in the past, and that men had lovedthem. Now they sleep--perhaps for ever. They commune with humanity indreams. Happy the man, happy the woman, who awakes the hills of Wessex.For though they sleep, they will never die."

His voice rose passionately.

"Cannot you see, cannot all your lecturers see, that it is we who aredying, and that down here the only thing that really lives is theMachine? We created the Machine, to do our will, but we cannot make itdo our will now. It has robbed us of the sense of space and of thesense of touch, it has blurred every human relation and narrowed downlove to a carnal act, it has paralysed our bodies and our wills, andnow it compels us to worship it. The Machine develops--but not on ourlines. The Machine proceeds--but not to our goal. We only exist as theblood corpuscles that course through its arteries, and if it could workwithout us, it would let us die. Oh, I have no remedy--or, at least,only one--to tell men again and again that I have seen the hills ofWessex as Ælfrid saw them when he overthrew the Danes.

"So the sun set. I forgot to mention that a belt of mist lay between myhill and other hills, and that it was the colour of pearl."

He broke off for the second time.

"Go on," said his mother wearily.

He shook his head.

"Go on. Nothing that you say can distress me now. I am hardened."

"I had meant to tell you the rest, but I cannot: I know that I cannot:good-bye."

Vashti stood irresolute. All her nerves were tingling with hisblasphemies. But she was also inquisitive.

"This is unfair," she complained. "You have called me across theworld to hear your story, and hear it I will. Tell me--as briefly aspossible, for this is a disastrous waste of time--tell me how youreturned to civilisation."

"Oh--that!" he said, starting. "You would like to hear aboutcivilisation. Certainly. Had I got to where my respirator fell down?"

"No--but I understand everything now. You put on your respirator, andmanaged to walk along the surface of the earth to a vomitory, and thereyour conduct was reported to the Central Committee."

"By no means."

He passed his hand over his forehead, as if dispelling some strongimpression. Then, resuming his narrative, he warmed to it again.

"My respirator fell about sunset. I had mentioned that the fountainseemed feebler, had I not."

"Yes."

"About sunset, it let the respirator fall. As I said, I had entirelyforgotten about the Machine, and I paid no great attention at the time,being occupied with other things. I had my pool of air, into which Icould dip when the outer keenness became intolerable, and which wouldpossibly remain for days, provided that no wind sprang up to disperseit. Not until it was too late, did I realize what the stoppage of theescape implied. You see--the gap in the tunnel had been mended; theMending Apparatus; the Mending Apparatus, was after me.

"One other warning I had, but I neglected it. The sky at night wasclearer than it had been in the day, and the moon, which was abouthalf the sky behind the sun, shone into the dell at moments quitebrightly. I was in my usual place--on the boundary between the twoatmospheres--when I thought I saw something dark move across thebottom of the dell, and vanish into the shaft. In my folly, I ran down.I bent over and listened, and I thought I heard a faint scraping noisein the depths.

"At this--but it was too late--I took alarm. I determined to put on myrespirator and to walk right out of the dell. But my respirator hadgone. I knew exactly where it had fallen--between the stopper and theaperture--and I could even feel the mark that it had made in the turf.It had gone, and I realized that something evil was at work, and I hadbetter escape to the other air, and, if I must die, die running towardsthe cloud that had been the colour of a pearl. I never started. Out ofthe shaft--it is too horrible. A worm, a long white worm, had crawledout of the shaft and was gliding over the moonlit grass.

"I screamed. I did everything that I should not have done, I stampedupon the creature instead of flying from it, and it at once curledround the ankle. Then we fought. The worm let me run all over thedell, but edged up my leg as I ran. 'Help!' I cried. (That part istoo awful. It belongs to the part that you will never know.) 'Help!'I cried. (Why cannot we suffer in silence?) 'Help!' I cried. Then myfeet were wound together, I fell, I was dragged away from the dearferns and the living hills, and past the great metal stopper (I cantell you this part), and I thought it might save me again if I caughthold of the handle. It also was enwrapped, it also. Oh, the whole dellwas full of the things. They were searching it in all directions,they were denuding it, and the white snouts of others peeped outof the hole, ready if needed. Everything that could be moved theybrought--brushwood, bundles of fern, everything, and down we all wentintertwined into hell. The last things that I saw, ere the stopperclosed after us, were certain stars, and I felt that a man of my sortlived in the sky. For I did fight, I fought till the very end, and itwas only my head hitting against the ladder that quieted me. I woke upin this room. The worms had vanished. I was surrounded by artificialair, artificial light, artificial peace, and my friends were calling tome down speaking-tubes to know whether I had come across any new ideaslately."

Here his story ended. Discussion of it was impossible, and Vashtiturned to go.

"It will end in Homelessness," she said quietly.

"I wish it would," retorted Kuno.

"The Machine has been most merciful."

"I prefer the mercy of God."

"By that superstitious phrase, do you mean that you could live in theouter air?"

"Yes."

"Have you ever seen, round the vomitories, the bones of those who wereextruded after the Great Rebellion?"

"Yes."

"They were left where they perished for our edification. A few crawledaway, but they perished, too--who can doubt it? And so with theHomeless of our own day. The surface of the earth supports life nolonger."

"Indeed."

"Ferns and a little grass may survive, but all higher forms haveperished. Has any air-ship detected them?"

"No."

"Has any lecturer dealt with them?"

"No."

"Then why this obstinacy?"

"Because I have seen them," he exploded.

"Seen what?"

"Because I have seen her in the twilight--because she came to my helpwhen I called--because she, too, was entangled by the worms, and,luckier than I, was killed by one of them piercing her throat."

He was mad. Vashti departed, nor, in the troubles that followed, didshe ever see his face again.


Part III

THE HOMELESS

During the years that followed Kuno's escapade, two importantdevelopments took place in the Machine. On the surface they wererevolutionary, but in either case men's minds had been preparedbeforehand, and they did but express tendencies that were latentalready.

The first of these was the abolition of respirators.

Advanced thinkers, like Vashti, had always held it foolish to visitthe surface of the earth. Air-ships might be necessary, but what wasthe good of going out for mere curiosity and crawling along for amile or two in a terrestrial motor? The habit was vulgar and perhapsfaintly improper: it was unproductive of ideas, and had no connectionwith the habits that really mattered. So respirators were abolished,and with them, of course, the terrestrial motors, and except for afew lecturers, who complained that they were debarred access to theirsubject-matter, the development was accepted quietly. Those who stillwanted to know what the earth was like had after all only to listento some gramophone, or to look into some cinematophote. And even thelecturers acquiesced when they found that a lecture on the sea wasnone the less stimulating when compiled out of other lectures thathad already been delivered on the same subject. "Beware of first-handideas!" exclaimed one of the most advanced of them. "First-hand ideasdo not really exist. They are but the physical impressions producedby love and fear, and on this gross foundation who could erect aphilosophy? Let your ideas be second-hand, and if possible tenth-hand,for then they will be far removed from that disturbing element--directobservation. Do not learn anything about this subject of mine--theFrench Revolution. Learn instead what I think that Enicharmon thoughtUrizen thought Gutch thought Ho-Yung thought Chi-Bo-Sing thoughtLafcadio Hearn thought Carlyle thought Mirabeau said about the FrenchRevolution. Through the medium of these eight great minds, the bloodthat was shed at Paris and the windows that were broken at Versailleswill be clarified to an idea which you may employ most profitably inyour daily lives. But be sure that the intermediates are many andvaried, for in history one authority exists to counteract another.Urizen must counteract the scepticism of Ho-Yung and Enicharmon, I mustmyself counteract the impetuosity of Gutch. You who listen to me arein a better position to judge about the French Revolution than I am.Your descendants will be even in a better position than you, for theywill learn what you think I think, and yet another intermediate will beadded to the chain. And in time"--his voice rose--"there will come ageneration that has got beyond facts, beyond impressions, a generationabsolutely colourless, a generation

'seraphically freeFrom taint of personality,'

which will see the French Revolution not as it happened, nor as theywould like it to have happened, but as it would have happened, had ittaken place in the days of the Machine."

Tremendous applause greeted this lecture, which did but voice a feelingalready latent in the minds of men--a feeling that terrestrial factsmust be ignored, and that the abolition of respirators was a positivegain. It was even suggested that air-ships should be abolished too.This was not done, because air-ships had somehow worked themselvesinto the Machine's system. But year by year they were used less, andmentioned less by thoughtful men.

The second great development was the re-establishment of religion.

This, too, had been voiced in the celebrated lecture. No one couldmistake the reverent tone in which the peroration had concluded, andit awakened a responsive echo in the heart of each. Those who had longworshipped silently, now began to talk. They described the strangefeeling of peace that came over them when they handled the Book of theMachine, the pleasure that it was to repeat certain numerals out of it,however little meaning those numerals conveyed to the outward ear, theecstasy of touching a button, however unimportant, or of ringing anelectric bell, however superfluously.

"The Machine," they exclaimed, "feeds us and clothes us and houses us;through it we speak to one another, through it we see one another, init we have our being. The Machine is the friend of ideas and the enemyof superstition: the Machine is omnipotent, eternal; blessed is theMachine." And before long this allocution was printed on the firstpage of the Book, and in subsequent editions the ritual swelled intoa complicated system of praise and prayer. The word "religion" wassedulously avoided, and in theory the Machine was still the creationand the implement of man. But in practice all, save a few retrogrades,worshipped it as divine. Nor was it worshipped in unity. One believerwould be chiefly impressed by the blue optic plates, through which hesaw other believers; another by the mending apparatus, which sinfulKuno had compared to worms; another by the lifts, another by the Book.And each would pray to this or to that, and ask it to intercede forhim with the Machine as a whole. Persecution--that also was present.It did not break out, for reasons that will be set forward shortly.But it was latent, and all who did not accept the minimum known as"undenominational Mechanism" lived in danger of Homelessness, whichmeans death, as we know.

To attribute these two great developments to the Central Committee,is to take a very narrow view of civilisation. The Central Committeeannounced the developments, it is true, but they were no more the causeof them than were the kings of the imperialistic period the cause ofwar. Rather did they yield to some invincible pressure, which came noone knew whither, and which, when gratified, was succeeded by somenew pressure equally invincible. To such a state of affairs it isconvenient to give the name of progress. No one confessed the Machinewas out of hand. Year by year it was served with increased efficiencyand decreased intelligence. The better a man knew his own duties uponit, the less he understood the duties of his neighbour, and in all theworld there was not one who understood the monster as a whole. Thosemaster brains had perished. They had left full directions, it is true,and their successors had each of them mastered a portion of thosedirections. But Humanity, in its desire for comfort, had over-reacheditself. It had exploited the riches of nature too far. Quietly andcomplacently, it was sinking into decadence, and progress had come tomean the progress of the Machine.

As for Vashti, her life went peacefully forward until the finaldisaster. She made her room dark and slept; she awoke and made the roomlight. She lectured and attended lectures. She exchanged ideas with herinnumerable friends and believed she was growing more spiritual. Attimes a friend was granted Euthanasia, and left his or her room forthe homelessness that is beyond all human conception. Vashti did notmuch mind. After an unsuccessful lecture, she would sometimes ask forEuthanasia herself. But the death-rate was not permitted to exceed thebirth-rate, and the Machine had hitherto refused it to her.

The troubles began quietly, long before she was conscious of them.

One day she was astonished at receiving a message from her son. Theynever communicated, having nothing in common, and she had only heardindirectly that he was still alive, and had been transferred from thenorthern hemisphere, where he had behaved so mischievously, to thesouthern--indeed, to a room not far from her own.

"Does he want me to visit him?" she thought. "Never again, never. And Ihave not the time."

No, it was madness of another kind.

He refused to visualize his face upon the blue plate, and speaking outof the darkness with solemnity said:

"The Machine stops."

"What do you say?"

"The Machine is stopping, I know it, I know the signs."

She burst into a peal of laughter. He heard her and was angry, and theyspoke no more.

"Can you imagine anything more absurd?" she cried to a friend. "A manwho was my son believes that the Machine is stopping. It would beimpious if it was not mad."

"The Machine is stopping?" her friend replied. "What does that mean?The phrase conveys nothing to me."

"Nor to me."

"He does not refer, I suppose, to the trouble there has been latelywith the music?"

"Oh no, of course not. Let us talk about music."

"Have you complained to the authorities?"

"Yes, and they say it wants mending, and referred me to the Committeeof the Mending Apparatus. I complained of those curious gasping sighsthat disfigure the symphonies of the Brisbane school. They sound likesome one in pain. The Committee of the Mending Apparatus say that itshall be remedied shortly."

Obscurely worried, she resumed her life. For one thing, the defect inthe music irritated her. For another thing, she could not forget Kuno'sspeech. If he had known that the music was out of repair--he could notknow it, for he detested music--if he had known that it was wrong,"the Machine stops" was exactly the venomous sort of remark he wouldhave made. Of course he had made it at a venture, but the coincidenceannoyed her, and she spoke with some petulance to the Committee of theMending Apparatus.

They replied, as before, that the defect would be set right shortly.

"Shortly! At once!" she retorted. "Why should I be worried by imperfectmusic? Things are always put right at once. If you do not mend it atonce, I shall complain to the Central Committee."

"No personal complaints are received by the Central Committee," theCommittee of the Mending Apparatus replied.

"Through whom am I to make my complaint, then?"

"Through us."

"I complain then."

"Your complaint shall be forwarded in its turn."

"Have others complained?"

This question was unmechanical, and the Committee of the MendingApparatus refused to answer it.

"It is too bad!" she exclaimed to another of her friends. "There neverwas such an unfortunate woman as myself. I can never be sure of mymusic now. It gets worse and worse each time I summon it."

"I too have my troubles," the friend replied. "Sometimes my ideas areinterrupted by a slight jarring noise."

"What is it?"

"I do not know whether it is inside my head, or inside the wall."

"Complain, in either case."

"I have complained, and my complaint will be forwarded in its turn tothe Central Committee."

Time passed, and they resented the defects no longer. The defectshad not been remedied, but the human tissues in that latter day hadbecome so subservient, that they readily adapted themselves to everycaprice of the Machine. The sigh at the crisis of the Brisbane symphonyno longer irritated Vashti; she accepted it as part of the melody.The jarring noise, whether in the head or in the wall, was no longerresented by her friend. And so with the mouldy artificial fruit, sowith the bath water that began to stink, so with the defective rhymesthat the poetry machine had taken to emit. All were bitterly complainedof at first, and then acquiesced in and forgotten. Things went frombad to worse unchallenged.

It was otherwise with the failure of the sleeping apparatus. Thatwas a more serious stoppage. There came a day when over the wholeworld--in Sumatra, in Wessex, in the innumerable cities of Courlandand Brazil--the beds, when summoned by their tired owners, failedto appear. It may seem a ludicrous matter, but from it we may datethe collapse of humanity. The Committee responsible for the failurewas assailed by complainants, whom it referred, as usual, to theCommittee of the Mending Apparatus, who in its turn assured them thattheir complaints would be forwarded to the Central Committee. But thediscontent grew, for mankind was not yet sufficiently adaptable to dowithout sleeping.

"Some one is meddling with the Machine----" they began.

"Some one is trying to make himself king, to reintroduce the personalelement."

"Punish that man with Homelessness."

"To the rescue! Avenge the Machine! Avenge the Machine!"

"War! Kill the man!"

But the Committee of the Mending Apparatus now came forward, andallayed the panic with well-chosen words. It confessed that the MendingApparatus was itself in need of repair.

The effect of this frank confession was admirable.

"Of course," said a famous lecturer--he of the French Revolution, whogilded each new decay with splendour--"of course we shall not press ourcomplaints now. The Mending Apparatus has treated us so well in thepast that we all sympathize with it, and will wait patiently for itsrecovery. In its own good time it will resume its duties. Meanwhile letus do without our beds, our tabloids, our other little wants. Such, Ifeel sure, would be the wish of the Machine."

Thousands of miles away his audience applauded. The Machine stilllinked them. Under the seas, beneath the roots of the mountains, ranthe wires through which they saw and heard, the enormous eyes and earsthat were their heritage, and the hum of many workings clothed theirthoughts in one garment of subserviency. Only the old and the sickremained ungrateful, for it was rumoured that Euthanasia, too, was outof order, and that pain had reappeared among men.

It became difficult to read. A blight entered the atmosphere and dulledits luminosity. At times Vashti could scarcely see across her room. Theair, too, was foul. Loud were the complaints, impotent the remedies,heroic the tone of the lecturer as he cried: "Courage, courage! Whatmatter so long as the Machine goes on? To it the darkness and thelight are one." And though things improved again after a time, the oldbrilliancy was never recaptured, and humanity never recovered from itsentrance into twilight. There was an hysterical talk of "measures,"of "provisional dictatorship," and the inhabitants of Sumatra wereasked to familiarize themselves with the workings of the centralpower station, the said power station being situated in France. Butfor the most part panic reigned, and men spent their strength prayingto their Books, tangible proofs of the Machine's omnipotence. Therewere gradations of terror--at times came rumours of hope--the MendingApparatus was almost mended--the enemies of the Machine had been gotunder--new "nerve-centres" were evolving which would do the work evenmore magnificently than before. But there came a day when, without theslightest warning, without any previous hint of feebleness, the entirecommunication-system broke down, all over the world, and the world, asthey understood it, ended.

Vashti was lecturing at the time and her earlier remarks had beenpunctuated with applause. As she proceeded the audience became silent,and at the conclusion there was no sound. Somewhat displeased, shecalled to a friend who was a specialist in sympathy. No sound:doubtless the friend was sleeping. And so with the next friend whomshe tried to summon, and so with the next, until she remembered Kuno'scryptic remark, "The Machine stops."

The phrase still conveyed nothing. If Eternity was stopping it would ofcourse be set going shortly.

For example, there was still a little light and air--the atmosphere hadimproved a few hours previously. There was still the Book, and whilethere was the Book there was security.

Then she broke down, for with the cessation of activity came anunexpected terror--silence.

She had never known silence, and the coming of it nearly killedher--it did kill many thousands of people outright. Ever since herbirth she had been surrounded by the steady hum. It was to the earwhat artificial air was to the lungs, and agonizing pains shot acrossher head. And scarcely knowing what she did, she stumbled forward andpressed the unfamiliar button, the one that opened the door of her cell.

Now the door of the cell worked on a simple hinge of its own. It wasnot connected with the central power station, dying far away in France.It opened, rousing immoderate hopes in Vashti, for she thought that theMachine had been mended. It opened, and she saw the dim tunnel thatcurved far away towards freedom. One look, and then she shrank back.For the tunnel was full of people--she was almost the last in that cityto have taken alarm.

People at any time repelled her, and these were nightmares from herworst dreams. People were crawling about, people were screaming,whimpering, gasping for breath, touching each other, vanishing in thedark, and ever and anon being pushed off the platform on to the liverail. Some were fighting round the electric bells, trying to summontrains which could not be summoned. Others were yelling for Euthanasiaor for respirators, or blaspheming the Machine. Others stood at thedoors of their cells fearing, like herself, either to stop in them orto leave them. And behind all the uproar was silence--the silence whichis the voice of the earth and of the generations who have gone.

No--it was worse than solitude. She closed the door again and satdown to wait for the end. The disintegration went on, accompanied byhorrible cracks and rumbling. The valves that restrained the MedicalApparatus must have been weakened, for it ruptured and hung hideouslyfrom the ceiling. The floor heaved and fell and flung her from herchair. A tube oozed towards her serpent fashion. And at last the finalhorror approached--light began to ebb, and she knew that civilisation'slong day was closing.

She whirled round, praying to be saved from this, at any rate, kissingthe Book, pressing button after button. The uproar outside wasincreasing, and even penetrated the wall. Slowly the brilliancy of hercell was dimmed, the reflections faded from her metal switches. Nowshe could not see the reading-stand, now not the Book, though she heldit in her hand. Light followed the flight of sound, air was followinglight, and the original void returned to the cavern from which it hadbeen so long excluded. Vashti continued to whirl, like the devotees ofan earlier religion, screaming, praying, striking at the buttons withbleeding hands.

It was thus that she opened her prison and escaped--escaped in thespirit: at least so it seems to me, ere my meditation closes. That sheescapes in the body--I cannot perceive that. She struck, by chance, theswitch that released the door, and the rush of foul air on her skin,the loud throbbing whispers in her ears, told her that she was facingthe tunnel again, and that tremendous platform on which she had seenmen fighting. They were not fighting now. Only the whispers remained,and the little whimpering groans. They were dying by hundreds out inthe dark.

She burst into tears.

Tears answered her.

They wept for humanity, those two, not for themselves. They could notbear that this should be the end. Ere silence was completed theirhearts were opened, and they knew what had been important on the earth.Man, the flower of all flesh, the noblest of all creatures visible,man who had once made god in his image, and had mirrored his strengthon the constellations, beautiful naked man was dying, strangled in thegarments that he had woven. Century after century had he toiled, andhere was his reward. Truly the garment had seemed heavenly at first,shot with the colours of culture, sewn with the threads of self-denial.And heavenly it had been so long as it was a garment and no more, solong as man could shed it at will and live by the essence that ishis soul, and the essence, equally divine, that is his body. The sinagainst the body--it was for that they wept in chief; the centuries ofwrong against the muscles and the nerves, and those five portals bywhich we can alone apprehend--glozing it over with talk of evolution,until the body was white pap, the home of ideas as colourless, lastsloshy stirrings of a spirit that had grasped the stars.

"Where are you?" she sobbed.

His voice in the darkness said, "Here."

"Is there any hope, Kuno?"

"None for us."

"Where are you?"

She crawled towards him over the bodies of the dead. His blood spurtedover her hands.

"Quicker," he gasped, "I am dying--but we touch, we talk, not throughthe Machine."

He kissed her.

"We have come back to our own. We die, but we have recaptured life,as it was in Wessex, when Ælfrid overthrew the Danes. We know whatthey know outside, they who dwelt in the cloud that is the colour of apearl."

"But, Kuno, is it true? Are there still men on the surface of theearth? Is this--this tunnel, this poisoned darkness--really not theend?"

He replied:

"I have seen them, spoken to them, loved them. They are hiding in themist and the ferns until our civilisation stops. Today they are theHomeless--tomorrow----"

"Oh, tomorrow--some fool will start the Machine again, tomorrow."

"Never," said Kuno, "never. Humanity has learnt its lesson."

As he spoke, the whole city was broken like a honeycomb. An air-shiphad sailed in through the vomitory into a ruined wharf. It crasheddownwards, exploding as it went, rending gallery after gallery with itswings of steel. For a moment they saw the nations of the dead, and,before they joined them, scraps of the untainted sky.